Now, let's have a look at the Snake class, snake.h and snake.cpp.
To start off snake.h,
we include the SDL library.
We have an enum class Direction which has directions up,
down, left, and right,
which are the directions that the snake can be traveling.
The snake constructor stores the grid width,
the grid height that are passed in and sets
an the initial position for the head
in the X coordinate and the head in the Y coordinate.
It's basically starting off the snake in the middle of the screen.
We have a method for updating the snake.
Each pass through the game loop.
We have a method to grow the body of the snake.
So once the snake eats some food it's body will grow.
We have a boolean that tells us if some integers that
are passed in are part of the snake in the grid.
We have a direction that the snake is traveling.
So initially, we set the direction of travel to be up.
We have the speed of the snake which is starting off as 0.1,
the size of the snake which is starting off as one,
a boolean which represents whether the snakes is alive or not in the game,
we set that to true.
We have float coordinates for the X and Y position of the snake's head.
Then we have a vector of SDL points for the body of the snake.
Now, an SDL point is just a struct that has int X and Y coordinates.
We also have some private methods,
UpdateHead, which when we call update,
it will call update head and each pass through the game loop,
it will update the coordinates of the head.
We also have UpdateBody which will
update the vector body here with the new coordinates of the body.
We have a boolean which tells us whether the snake is growing.
So once the snake eats some food,
we store whether the snake is growing.
Then the next pass through the game loop, the snake grows.
We also have an int grid width and an int grid height that we store.
Over in snake.cpp, we have the definition of the update method.
So let's have a look and see what's going on here.
The first thing that we do is capture the head cell before updating.
The reasons for this will become apparent in just a second.
But we store an SDL point called the previous cell,
and we take the float,
head_X and head_Y coordinates of the snake's head and we static cast them to int.
So we store those in this SDL point previous cell.
Then we update the head which we'll go look at it in a second.
Then we have the current cell of the head,
also stored as an SDL point.
So basically we're keeping the cell
of the head before updating and the cell of the head after updating.
Now, we only need to update the body of the snake if the head has moved to a new cell.
So that's sort of the way that the snake gets updated in the game.
So we can check if the previous cell is equal to the current cell by just checking if
the current cell and previous cell X coordinates are the same and
the current cell Y and previous cell Y coordinates are the same.
If either of these are not the same,
then we need to update the body.
So we'll go look at how UpdateHead and UpdateBody work down below.
So snake UpdateHead has the direction of the snake.
If the direction of the snake is up,
so we have a switch with some cases,
we pass in direction.
If the direction of the snake is up then we decrease the heads Y by the speed.
So head_Y minus equals speed.
Now, remember that in SDL,
the origin is in the upper left corner.
So if the snake is heading up in the game,
the Y coordinate is headed down.
So head_Y is minus equals speed if we're going up,
if we're going down head_Y is plus equals speed,
if we're going left head_X is minus equals
the speed and if we're going right head_X is plus equals speed.
So this will update the float X and Y position of the head.
Now, we want the snake to wrap around the window.
So if we go off the top or the bottom of the window,
we want to reappear on the opposite.
So if we go off the top of the window we want the snake to reappear on the bottom.
If we go off the left side of the window we want to reappear on the right.
So we have a few lines
here that wrap the snake around to the beginning if we're going off the screen.
Basically, what this does is we add head_X to the grid width and
head Y to the grid width and then we modulo by
the grid width and we store that value as head_X and head_Y.
So essentially, if head_X is bigger than the grid,
we will modulo by the grid width and wrap around beginning and similarly for head_Y.
The reason for adding head_X to grid width here is to
ensure that head_X isn't negative and head_Y is not negative.
It's possible that in this updating,
we might get a negative value for head_X.
If we just modulo by the grid width,
then we end up with a negative value which is [inaudible].
So in the next method, we're going to update the body.
So we pass in the current head cell and the previous head cell.
The snake updates by making the previous location of the head as part of the body.
This might be a little bit difficult to think about
until you've watched how the snake game works.
But basically, the body follows the previous location of the head.
So if the head goes up and then goes right,
all the body's cells go through that same path.
So as the head moves forward,
the previous location of the head becomes a body cell.
To update the snake,
we basically turn the previous location of the head into
a body cell and we remove the tail of the body.
So that's exactly what we're doing in these next lines.
If the snake is not growing,
we erase the very end of the snake; The tail.
If the snake is growing,
then what happens is the head moves forward and the cell where the head was,
becomes part of the body,
but we don't remove the tail because the body is increasing by one cell in length.
So if the head is growing,
we're done growing and we set growing equal to false and we increase the size basically.
These next lines check if the snake has died.
So for each item in the body,
we check if the head cells
coordinates are equal to one of the bodies coordinates.
If that happens, the snake has run into its own body and we set alive equal to false.
There's a GrowBody here which is called, in the game class,
we'll see that in another video,
but if GrowBody is called then we set growing equal to true.
Finally, there's a method here at the end which is
used to check if a cell is occupied by a snake.
We use this when placing food in the game
because we don't want to place food on top of the snake.
So this basically checks if the food coordinates are in the same cell as the head,
or if they're in the same cell as any of the body.